Okay, we're ready now.
Now we're ready.
Okay, start again.
That little red light is on, right?
Little evil light, yeah.
Go ahead.
Last year, I wrote a piece for GQ.
I went out and saw my mother's murder file for the first time in 36 years.
Saw the pictures of her dead.
Saw the picture renewed on the morgue slab.
The man who showed me the file was working the unsolved unit of the LA County Sheriff's Homicide Bureau.
It's the LA County Sheriff's, nothing to do with the LAPD.
Wasn't a cop at the time my mother was dead, and he was about to retire now.
Came on in 61, retired in 94.
Bill Stoner, the man that saw the Cotton Club case.
Did he have an interest in the case?
No, no.
I just called him up.
I said, I want to see the query.
Right, right.
I said, I want to see the file.
He showed it to me.
We got to be friendly.
I decided I wanted to expand the story about the file into a book.
I told Sonny Mehta this, the boss, Alfred E. Knopf.
He said, yeah, do it.
told a lot of my publishers, foreign publishers, they said, yeah, go ahead, do it.
They gave me offers.
This is going to be a nonfiction book?
Yes.
The whole way?
I mean, you don't have to play with the stuff.
No.
Can you do that?
And then fiction.
No.
This is totally nonfiction.
Okay.
I mean, it's my autobiography, my mother's biography, Bill Stoner's biography.
It is going to be a juxtaposition of the original 1958-59 investigation into my mother's death, recreated from witness testimony
transcripts and official records, and then Bill Stoner and I have teamed up in the present day to reinvestigate the case.
Take it as far as it can go.
Now, Stoner's doing this as a private investigator?
He's a reservist.
He's a reservist to the L.A.
Sheriff's.
But he's not doing this officially, then.
He's doing this.
You're hiring him to do it, basically.
No, we're doing it together.
He's getting a percentage of the book profits.
Oh.
Is he going to have a byline on the book?
No.
We've already sold the movie, right?
to a producer named Robert Greenwald, a man that did A Woman of Independent Means for TV.
That's what I'm doing now.
So that's the basic story.
How far into the book are you?
I haven't even started yet.
We'll probably be on the investigation all the way through the summer.
Are you hopeful that you can solve this?
Well, there's a linchpin to the case.
My mother was last seen with a dark-haired swarthy man and a blonde woman.
What one of these?
No.
Left a bar together.
My mother's body was found the next morning.
A blonde woman never came forth, presumably for fear of reprisals.
And 36 years have passed.
In these alcohol-fueled rape murders, very often the material witnesses, those who don't come forth, end up talking about it, and to lots of people.
Senator believes there's a number of people out there who know elements of the story or the entire story, and maybe even the identity of the man.
The man himself might have talked about.
It's just a question of getting enough publicity, going through our established investigatory procedures and getting as much publicity as we can and sifting through the information and misinformation.
Is this important to you as a person or as a writer?
Both.
I would not undertake this investigation.
You're pretty honest that your mother was not your most favorite person in the whole world.
I have no idea who she is.
No idea.
Not an idea in hell who she is.
I hated her in the months preceding her death.
She had been lousy to me.
She'd been good to me before.
She was a complex, tormented, alcoholic, promiscuous woman, and I want to know who she was.
I would not undertake this investigation if there weren't a book attached to it.
I simply couldn't afford to.
I couldn't afford to put down work
for six months and go around chasing leads.
Is it a continuation?
Is it part of the oeuvre?
Because it is a non-fiction book for you.
It's a non-fiction book.
It's a part of the oeuvre.
It's totally separate from the oeuvre.
It is non-fiction.
Everything is true.
Does it fit in with what you've done?
Yes and no.
It's what it is.
It's a non-fiction.
It happened.
It's my autobiography.
But certainly you're going to write it
with all the skill and the literary techniques and perception that you can muster as an artist.
Mostly it's the journey back into myself.
And you have no idea how far forward you're going to take it, or are you going to just revolve it around?
I have no idea the structure.
I'm not even fucking with anything yet.
I have no idea what the structure will be.
I'm just going to reinvestigate the case with Bill Stoner through the summer and sit down and write the book.
Mm-hmm.
Have you put a deadline on it?
No.
So you said through the summer, but I mean, what if you're close?
You don't see yourself being obsessed with this.
Oh, I am obsessed with it.
Yeah.
Ikenoff tentatively wants the book for the fall of 1996.
Well, that doesn't mean a whole hell of a lot of that.
Ikenoff is very good at turning books around very fast.
What's the root of the obsession?
Just an unsolved crime that happens to involve you?
It's my mother.
Yeah, it's my mother.
I went back.
I saw the file.
I said to myself, it's not over.
I saw the opportunity to write a great book.
And of course, and this is kind of a cliche question, but are you a writer because of these events?
Sure.
But more than anything else, I'm a writer because I've always loved to read.
I write the kind of books that I loved to read as a kid.
And of course, my taste has evolved.
Now, I get no satisfaction from reading other people's books, only very occasionally.
Really?
And I have to write the books to save my desire for reading this.
Why is it that other people don't?
I don't think any crime writer is very good.
I just don't see anybody who's being very good.
You mean out there now?
Out there now, yeah.
I've reviewed Raymond Chandler.
I don't think he's very good.
Tremendously overrated.
And...
I have to do this.
And it's consciousness after a while.
All good writers and great writers bring a certain amount of, you might call it thematic unity in their unconscious, to the craft.
They can write two or three or four books based on everything that they've known and felt, their knowledge of form that they've gotten from reading books.
And after that, it becomes a question of, you can take the rest.
You can write bigger books, darker books, deeper books, denser books.
You're going to write in the third person and the first person.
You're going to change your style.
Are you exploring the form?
Is it a constant exploration?
Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely.
Did you read what you asked?
I have it with me.
Yeah.
That book, it's totally experimental.
And you got your balls squeezed for that.
No.
People loved the book.
People hated the book.
Did not sell his book as well as my previous book.
The first book of yours I read was The Big Nowhere.
Yeah.
Totally blew me away.
Came in, book review editor, and I had the black guy, you know, preceded it.
Yeah.
I mean, it was one of these feasts, you know.
I thought LA Confidential did different things.
Yeah.
For me, weren't as satisfying as the... The themes, the two themes of the black guy, yeah.
and The Big Nowhere, you know, the sexual obsession that's in, you know, that's in The Black Dahlia and The Twin Thieves of Homosexuality and Communism in The Big Nowhere are very powerful.
And L.A.
Confidential is a more sprawling book.
It's really a story about a city and its political underpinnings and the crimes that built it.
No, I'm amazed that you did, and I love the jacket art on those books.
It's terrific.
They really did evoke the 50s, I think.
Yeah, yeah.
Beautifully.
Yeah.
I mean, you don't remember anything in the 50s to speak of.
Sure, sure I do.
I was born in 48.
I remember things from, I remember the Army-McCarthy hearings in 1954.
No kidding.
I remember Eisenhower's re-election in 50s.
I mean, I remember a lot.
Are you basically trying to write about, you know, using, you know, 48 as the year of your birth and trying to write
It all really starts with the Black Dahlia and my obsession with that case and how it grew out of my mother's murder, and in my mind, imaginatively, the symbiosis of the two dead women.
From that point on, I realized that I wanted to recreate L.A.
in the 50s because I lived through it.
I evinced absolutely no precocity as a kid, but I sensed, especially after my mother's death, crazy shit going on outside the frame of my consciousness.
I wrote that quartet, and I said, you know, let's not write strict crime novels anymore.
I said to myself, I want to get out of L.A.
I don't want to be known as a guy who wrote four great books about demonic cops from 1947 to 1959.
I wanted to write about crime as politics and the private nightmare of public policy.
That's when I conceived American Tabloid, which is the first book in the trilogy.
It's absolutely not a crime novel.
Certainly not a mystery novel.
There are no homicide investigations in this book.
What is it then?
Would you classify it in any way?
I'd call it punchy mainstream popular fiction.
Certainly the noir aspect is... The noir aspect is still in it.
Without question, it's still in it.
Yeah.
I think it's history's noir.
I think it's...
a great hyperbolic novel of that last gasp of pre-public accountability in America.
You have a preparatory note.
I mean, there is no innocence, apparently, you say.
I said America was never innocent.
Never innocent.
So there are some critics who suggest that this is a loss of innocence book.
It's not a loss of innocence.
There never was any.
So it's a very cynical book in that respect.
No, I don't think so.
I think it's a realistic book.
And I think that the morality of the book is the humanity of the characters.
And I like messing with people's heads.
I want them to identify with people under Ward, Littell, and Kemper Boyd.
I want them to be applauded by them.
I want them to feel for them.
I want them to feel chiefly seduced by the Kennedys in the manner the characters were.
I want people to step outside of themselves and go, wow, I'm really rooting for these guys to whack out Jack the Haircut.
Yeah.
Man, what a blast.
Invade the Bear Pigs.
Put that twist girl, Bob Jahelka, and Jack the Haircut's dead.
But you really are kind of giving it a half a turn, aren't you?
You really want us to be cheering for them for the wrong people, perhaps, no?
I like these guys.
I certainly don't want to hang out with them.
You don't admire them, so to speak.
No, I don't admire them.
You're not making moral judgments, certainly.
No, no.
The only moral judgment there is that every man pays terrible crimes.
I mean, the guy killed his own brother, for God's sakes.
Pete Bonner, yeah.
Well, you know what?
I think Bobby killed Jack.
Come on.
You don't kill John F. Kennedy's father did.
It was Bobby's Oedipal Drama the guy Jack killed.
Bobby was the only guy, the only fucking Kennedy...
with the moral vision to recognize Joe Kennedy for what he really was.
He persecuted Joe Kennedy once removed by going after the mob, and more than anything else, that's what got Jack killed.
Yeah, okay.
Yeah, I firmly believe that.
And so you have a story there very much of brothers and fathers and sons.
Bondurant killed his own brother by accident.
Kemper Boyd's brother died in a hunting accident, and Bobby kills Jack.
Do you feel any kind of obligation to the factual record?
You're doing tremendous research now for your non-fiction book.
Right.
I did research on this book, too.
To what extent?
Well, the only question I never answer on an exam was what's true and what's not.
I want to keep that ambiguous.
Is this true with a capital C, or just in terms of factual things?
I did a bunch of research.
I hired a researcher.
She compiled notes for me, chiefly chronologies, because I knew what I wanted to work with.
You've got to keep that line blurred.
And I have an obligation to stay faithful to my view of history, which I think I do in that book.
Do you have a view of history?
My view of history is basically power-driven, grasping men getting caught up in events that they think they control and can't.
And this is a general observation, this is a general view.
Yeah, it's a general view.
Applied successively in areas.
Applied, it's applied here because I don't generally think in the abstract.
Ideas come to me, stories come to me, characters come to me, and I start putting it together.
And it isn't until I finish the book that I realize that's what this book is about.
These are the themes.
Now, can you give me some idea of the other books in the trilogy?
Book number two, it's called the Underworld USA Trilogy.
So you have a name for the trilogy?
Yeah, Underworld USA Trilogy.
Well, item two... Colon Trilogy?
The Kong Trilogy?
No, Colon Trilogy.
Underworld USA Trilogy.
No, Underworld USA Trilogy.
Volume two picks up five minutes after American Tabloid concludes in Dallas.
and covers 63 to 68 in America.
A lot of the same characters occur.
Bobby Kennedy, Pete Ponderant, Ward Littell, Jimmy Hoffa, Howard Hughes, J. Edgar DuBois.
And we go to Vietnam, we go to Las Vegas, we go to Dallas, we go to LA, we go to Chicago.
Volume 3, I have no idea about, but I know that it will be a seamless continuum following up on Volume 2.
You know the year that it can close?
Do you have an event?
That's quite a defining year.
We've got J. Edgar Hoover and his war on the Civil Rights Movement, Martin Luther King's assassination, Bobby Kennedy's assassination.
I mean, if you're looking for bookends, you certainly have them there.
Yeah, yeah.
How accurate do you think the characters are?
The characters based on actual people?
You know, years ago, Herman Chandler said that Dashiell Hammett took murder and gave it back to the people who really committed it.
I would like to go back even more at a vista plate
and give it back to the people that I see as having really committed it.
The primary sensibility in crime fiction is that there is a man or a woman, and down these mean streets they go.
They're neither tarnished nor afraid.
They hate racism.
They hate authority.
They're rebels within the system.
The system tries to grind them to dust, but they can't because they have real integrity.
They are conveniently...
liberal in the best sense of the world, where they are incorruptible, they are egalitarian in their worldview, they are lonely, haunted, but unafraid, and easy for readers to identify with.
That's the formula that Raymond Chandler started.
It's profoundly adaptable, which is why now you've got the black private eye, the gay black private eye, you know, the gay black woman private eye, the dwarf private eye, the
extraterrestrial, private eye.
It's also, you know, cheap shot, very easy writing, too.
I could write first person, conversational, private eye book, and a good one by the standards of the genre, which to me is totally moribund.
I could write one in two weeks.
And for all I know, make more money and sell more books than I'm going to be selling now.
But my vision of crime is that the real protagonists are these historical bottom feeders
who are not the foes of the corrupt system but the exploiters of it.
The guys that break legs for Jack the haircut.
The guys that beat up Rodney King interest me more than the guys in the LAPD who might be appalled by that and who might set out to be knights on their own.
And I want to give crime fiction back
to these guys.
Are you pleased to be here while the OJ thing is going on out there?
Oh, shit, I haven't followed it.
I haven't followed it at all.
You haven't been tempted at all to pick up on any of it?
I wrote a piece about an essay on it for GQ, which was in the December issue.
But that was just my impressions of the overall media service.
I don't know any of the specifics.
I stay away from popular culture.
I go to movies.
But this is implied in your view.
What?
This isn't a crime story in your view?
I don't know what it is.
I don't know what it is beyond my initial reaction to it.
They say Joe McGinnis is out there attempting to do something out of the book.
I'm curious to see what he comes up with.
Assuming that everything I've read about your early years after your mother's murder accurately and accurately reported doesn't seem
to have you recount any of it as accurate as I've read it.
But I really am interested in the forces that drove you to become an occasional delight.
I know you said these are things that you've read.
I love to read.
I wanted to tell stories.
I wanted the identity of being a novelist.
Crime fiction is the big love of my life.
Would that happen without your money?
I don't know.
I can't say.
The die was cast.
Certainly the Black Dahlia story has its parallels, doesn't it?
Yeah, it does.
How did that story come to your attention?
My father got me a book called The Badge by Jack Webb of Dragnet fame for my 11th birthday.
And then this has kind of resonated through the years?
I read it.
My mother had been murdered six months prior, seven months prior.
It shocked me.
Well, yeah.
Really, man.
He did me a big service.
I became very much interested in crime that first summer following my mother's death.
And he got me the badge, and I read it, and I got obsessed with the Black Dahlia case, and had terrible nightmares about Elizabeth Short, and years passed, and
I thought about it and thought about it.
My curiosity spiraled out to encompass L.A.'
's criminal history, crime in general.
Read a million crime books, good, bad, and indifferent.
But I always wanted to write because what does anybody want?
You know, they want to express their inner life.
They want to rewrite their personal history.
They want to fix events for posterity.
And I thought that I had the kind of brain that could not come up with the complex, well-layered plots that crime fiction requires.
I thought I'd write painful novels about being a young drug addict, drunk in America.
What gave me that crazy notion, I don't know, because I can't stand reading stuff like that.
Why the fuck should I, you know, I just don't want to read it.
The first story that came to me was Brown's Requiem, my first novel.
Did it basically...
I wrote an outline.
I wrote an abbreviated outline for it, followed the outline, wrote the book, and sold it.
You really are an outline person, aren't you?
The outline for American Tabloid is 250 pages.
Amazing.
So there really are no surprises for you as the work?
Well, the characters embellish the details of their lives, flesh out, in the course of writing the actual text.
But I don't deviate from the plot.
The plot itself is pretty well fixed in the outlet.
The quote I've read in several places, that you want to be perceived as the American Tolstoy.
Want to give me a comment on that?
I've never read Tolstoy, but I've never read any American crime novels, just about.
I want to write The Biggest Baddest.
So why did you say the American Tolstoy?
Because he writes the biggest.
He's often mentioned as the king novelist, the guy that gives you the most bang for your buck.
And that's how I feel about it.
Does it disturb you that, you said earlier, that this book, and I quite agree, that this isn't a crime novel, that you have been identified as a genre writer that bothers you, doesn't bother you, or you don't care?
I've been reviewed twice now in the New York Times, and I mean big full-page threads.
Not mystery, either one.
Yeah, I think I've moved away from that.
And how do you see the body of work?
I mean, do you see it as... I see it as expanding.
I see each book as being better than the book that preceded it.
I see myself as taking risks.
I see an accumulation of critical acclaim.
And... Is that important to you?
Yeah, you know, it is.
It is.
I enjoy it.
It's validation at its lowest level.
That's what it's definable as.
What's validation at the highest level?
The book itself.
You just hand the book and say, I wrote that.
It's a Knopf book.
That stands for a lot, doesn't it?
Yeah, it's a Knopf book.
I mean, look how beautiful the physical book is itself.
Oh, it's gorgeous.
And that's the validation at the highest level.
Do you have a reader in mind?
No, myself.
I'm the most exacting judge out there.
I mean, I'm pleased that you aren't cowed in any way by political correctness.
Political correctness, I guess it had its head in.
It's gone now.
Everybody loathes it.
Everybody loathes it, but boy, it's still there.
I mean, we just got through February, Black History Month.
The best success I had was with a story of this woman from Martha's Vineyard.
You know, Dorothy West, survivor of the Harlem Renaissance.
She's very old now.
She's 87.
Lovely lady.
Went and did a feature opera.
Placed it everywhere.
I mean, everybody took it.
Milwaukee Journal took it.
So you can talk about everybody loading it, but I mean, this piece basically satisfied everything.
African-American, you know what I'm saying.
Blah, blah, blah, blah, I pressed the board.
So you're not supposed to say black anymore, right?
She says black.
She says colored.
I mean, she comes before black.
She's from Negro.
She's coming from Negro.
Yeah.
Of course, the whole thing about this book is that it is people who pass, you know.
Her father was blue eyes and passed for white.
Yeah.
I used to know a wino caddy named Charlie Tucker.
Black guy.
Good looking guy, too.
I used to say, my name is Charlie Tucker, I'm a bad motherfucker, and I don't take shit from a no-cocksucker.
I guess we all, you know, you write what you know, too.
I mean, I guess the reality of the persuasiveness of the people above whom you write, I guess this does come from your own
Dark years, I guess, out there.
Yeah, curiosity.
And a lot of it is, again, it's just consciousness.
I have just tried to change.
Tried.
And as I've gotten older, I felt the ebb and flow of the years and the history.
The ebb and flow of history.
And now I'm writing about the early 1960s, which is the era of my consciousness, as opposed to the era of my childhood.
And I realized I was taking notes back then.
You were?
Mental notes, yeah.
Yeah.
Do you think you had works in mind?
Mental notes.
This is material that you kind of knew intuitively that you had summoned forth at some point?
I knew that sooner or later I wanted to write books, but it was just a pipe dream then.
And on the first book, that was a paperback, I guess, right?
Yeah.
And were these with Otto, or Otto came later?
No, Otto came later.
My first two books were Avon paperback originals.
You've got to collect his items.
Yeah, the first editions are, yeah.
Then the three Lloyd Hopkins books, Blood on the Moon, Because of the Night and Suicide Hill, that I did for Otto.
Then I did another paperback original for Avon called Cure on the Road, which was also published as Silent Terror, which is not my title.
Then I did the L.A.
Quartet, the first three volumes for him.
Was this mindfully a quartet when it started?
No, I decided after I wrote The Black Diet that I wanted to turn it into a quartet.
So this trilogy will take us through the 60s, I gather?
Into 1973.
Basically three books, a trilogy, 15 years of history broken down into five-year influence.
And what comes after that?
You want to keep bringing it forward?
You know, the non-fiction book is next, and then the trilogy.
I want to do the biggest crime novel ever written.
It's going to be about two generations of the Wisconsin State Police.
My mother's from Wisconsin.
I've spent scant time there.
The northern Midwest is seductive to me.
I like the Midwest.
You know, my wife and I are moving there in a few months.
And I think it'll be a thousand-page hardcover book.
Really?
And you just have an idea of the shape and the scope, but really not what it is.
I have no specifics on it.
Are you working on more than one thing at a time?
No.
Are you really focused when you're doing this?
I have the best concentration I've ever seen on a rider.
I know how to think.
I know how to sustain concentration.
Is it a painting they ask for you, or is it hard?
I love it.
I mean, there's times when I don't want to do it, but I do it anyway.
I like to work.
Are you a rewriter?
I rewrite and rewrite and rewrite, so I've got to be perfect.
It's got to be seamless and perfect, or I'm more committed to it.
And physically, how do you write?
Word processor?
I write by hand.
I have a woman who types for me, who's been working for me for 13 years.
Is that how long you've been in Connecticut, 13 years?
I've been in suburban New York and Connecticut for 13 years, yeah.
Was this a statement leaving L.A.
for you, or is it just a... My first book was about to be published.
I had never really been anywhere else, and I just wanted to get out of town.
I mean, was it a symbolic thing, too?
I mean... I wanted to get out.
I'd been there too long.
What if you hadn't sold the first couple books?
What do you think would have become?
I'd have kept writing.
I mean, you're a writer.
You do that.
Yeah.
How do you take editing?
I take it okay.
Sonny Mettet, Kate Knopf, understands books, understands the author's intentions, and has a deep feeling for my book, and he's a damn good editor, and his suggestions have been sound on the two books of mine that he's edited.
And boy, he really, I mean, the quotes I've read, the guy is in awe of.
At all, apparently he still maintained very cordial relationships.
Oh, yeah, we're still good friends.
Yeah, I saw Otto in New York on Monday.
I mean, I guess he understood that you have to let the bird leave the nest, so to speak.
Well, Knopf is Knopf.
I mean, you know, what writer wouldn't give their eye teeth to go there?
Sure.
It's the biggest thrill of my career is being published by Knopf.
Really?
Yeah.
That's a validation, isn't it, certainly?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Anything I should cover that I haven't?
Tell me a little bit about this Y designation.
Well, I think I'm moving out of it.
You've read American Tablet.
You know that at the end you've got Pete Bondurant, desperately in love, writing the whirlwind of history.
and terrified, this terrible man, terrified, and holding on to this woman.
And you've got Ward Littell, who has achieved great power at a terrible price.
And I think I want to soften and humanize these guys over the course of the next book.
And I think I'm moving away from the noir universe.
I think I've taken noirs as far as it can go, and I think it's time to change.
And I won't know really until I sit down and start plotting out that book.
Here's a checklist.
Yes, sir.
You can take these before you know the chips.
And they're real good and real addictive.
The greasiest and the best.
Wonderful.
So, I think noir is largely designated as being a style, especially as far as the movies go.
I think, I haven't read a lot of the noir novelists like David Goodis and David Thompson.
I think I've created a new genre with historical noir, and I want to move away from it.
So you have no, you're a young guy, you're 47.
You're not that much older.
51.
51, yeah.
Good age.
52 this year.
Got my first book coming out this summer.
Congratulations.
Who's publishing?
Holt.
What's it about?
It's about bibliomania, believe it or not.